JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
The future commander in chief
strikes a deal
to keep factory jobs in the U.S.
-- what this
early push for the manufacturing
sector could
tell us about a Trump
administration.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Thursday,
we join the medics on the front
lines against
ISIS -- a look into the lives of
American
volunteers helping bandage and
heal the victims
of the battle for Mosul.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And America's
forgotten government
investment -- a look at why the
nation's infrastructure
and productivity are getting
slower by the
century.
JACOB HACKER, Yale University:
Every major
component of your iPhone is as a
result of
public investment and
development, GPS, the
memory processors, touch-screen
technology,
even that annoying voice.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President-elect
Trump made
his first public speech today
since the election
on a trip to Indiana to tout a
deal that he
said made good on a campaign
promise.
Mr. Trump met with Carrier
workers on the
floor of their Indianapolis
plant today.
Many of their jobs were saved
because of the
deal he helped broker.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
President-Elect: So many
people in these other -- that
big, big, beautiful
plant behind us, which will be
even more beautiful
in about seven months from now,
they're so
happy.
They're going to have a great
Christmas.
That's most important.
But, also, I just want to let
all of the other
companies know that we're going
to do great
things for business.
There's no reason for them to
leave anymore.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Word of what was
in the deal
filtered out today.
Carrier's parent company, United
Technologies,
will get $7 million in Indiana
state tax breaks
over 10 years.
In exchange, the company is
investing $16
million into its Indiana
operations.
That means its Indianapolis
furnace plant
will stay open, saving 800 jobs
there.
Another 300 jobs in the state
will also be
spared.
But it's not all rosy -- 600
jobs at the Indianapolis
plant will still be outsourced
to Mexico.
The parent company is also
sticking with plans
to close a plant just two hours'
drive away.
Late today, Mr. Trump left
Indiana for an
evening rally in Ohio, kicking
off what his
team calls a thank you tour.
Earlier in the day, there was
transition work.
Robert Gates, the former defense
secretary,
was spotted in Trump Tower,
while, on Capitol
Hill, his education secretary
pick, Betsy
DeVos, met with Senate Majority
Leader Mitch
McConnell.
Senate Democrats pushed to
require nominees
like DeVos to release tax
returns before they
are confirmed.
SEN.
PATTY MURRAY (D), Washington: If
they have
no shady business dealings or
records of taking
advantage of the middle class,
they should
be happy to have us take a look.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in Wisconsin,
the recount
requested by Green Party nominee
Jill Stein
began, although it's not
expected to change
the outcome.
Meanwhile, Hillary Clinton's
popular vote
lead has now surpassed 2.5
million, with ballots
still being counted.
And late today, there were
reports that president-elect
Trump has decided who will fill
a major Cabinet
job.
The Washington Post and CNN
reported that
he's chosen retired Marine
General James Mattis
as his secretary of defense.
But a Trump spokesman said that
no decision
has been made yet.
We will have a closer look at
the Carrier
deal in Indiana right after the
news summary.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In other news
today: The
smoke is clearing from days of
wildfires in
Tennessee's Great Smoky
Mountains, and recovery
efforts are in full swing.
The death toll from the blaze
rose to 10 people
today as search-and-rescue crews
fanned out
around the eastern city of
Gatlinburg.
Sevier County Mayor Larry Waters
said authorities
were making headway on dozens of
missing persons
reports.
LARRY WATERS, Sevier County,
Tennessee, Mayor:
We're pleased with one aspect of
it, and that
is that a significant number of
those leads,
we found people where they are,
and we hope
that that trend continues as we
move forward.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Officials said
they expected
the search teams to finish
combing the fire-ravaged
areas tonight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: French President
Francois Hollande
said today that he will not seek
a second
term, citing historically low
approval ratings.
During his time in office,
France has grappled
with high unemployment rates and
terrorism.
The first round of the French
presidential
election is set to begin next
April.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Colombia's
Congress has
ratified a long-sought peace
agreement with
the leftist rebel group FARC
after years of
negotiations.
That comes after Colombian
voters narrowly
rejected an earlier version in a
referendum
last October.
Lawmakers voted last night,
clearing a final
hurdle to the deal's
implementation.
Now FARC rebels will have six
months to turn
over their weapons to U.N.
monitors.
MAN (through translator): We are
committed
to working very quickly on the
amnesty law
for members of the FARC who have
not committed
atrocious crimes, non-admissible
crimes.
That is perhaps the first thing
we have to
do.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Opponents of
the deal in
Congress boycotted the vote,
calling the accord
too lenient on the rebels.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. Senate
today unanimously
voted to extend sanctions on
Iran for another
decade.
Supporters said that it will
give Congress
the ability to punish Iran,
should it violate
its landmark nuclear deal with
the U.S.
The measure had already won
approval in the
House.
Now President Obama is expected
to sign it
into law.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The United
Nations is out
with its latest tally of the
world's population.
It offers a staggering look at
the struggles
facing young women today.
The planet's population grew 1
percent this
year to 7.4 billion people; 89
percent of
the world's 125 million
10-year-olds are living
in developing countries, where
girls face
obstacles to equal education,
quality health
care, and safety.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There are new
signs the U.S.
manufacturing sector is starting
to rebound.
Factory activity hit a
five-month high in
November, due in part to an
increase in new
orders and production.
Even so, stocks were mixed on
Wall Street
today.
The Dow Jones industrial average
notched another
record high, climbing 68 points
to close at
nearly 19192.
The Nasdaq fell 72 points, and
the S&P 500
slipped seven.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Still to come
on the "NewsHour":
what's in the deal to keep
Carrier manufacturing
jobs in the U.S.?; lifesaving
efforts on the
front lines of Mosul; the latest
scientific
advancements to prevent and cure
AIDS; and
much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President-elect
Trump's trip
today to the Carrier plant in
Indiana was
a moment to celebrate the jobs
that were saved,
but it's also led to more
questions about
whether this kind of deal could
be replicated
and to concerns about the state
of the industry.
To break it down, I'm joined by
Scott Paul
of the Alliance for American
Manufacturing,
which represents some leading
companies in
that field, and Greg Ip of The
Wall Street
Journal.
And we welcome both of you to
the program.
Greg Ip, remind us, first of
all, why was
Carrier going to move these jobs
to Mexico
in the first place?
GREG IP, The Wall Street
Journal: Cheap labor,
basically, in Mexico.
They can pay workers $24 per
day, plus benefits.
In Indiana, they are paying $30
per hour.
So, they were coming to the same
conclusion
that so many other manufacturers
over the
last few decades have come to,
which is that
it's cheaper to make that
product elsewhere.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Scott Paul,
what's your
understanding of why this
company changed
its mind?
SCOTT PAUL, Alliance for
American Manufacturing:
Well, I think it's pretty clear
there was
a whole lot of pressure exerted
by the president-elect
of the United States and the
vice president-elect
of the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Who happens to be
the governor.
SCOTT PAUL: Who happens to be
the governor
of Indiana.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
SCOTT PAUL: Trump had started
tweeting about
this in February and talking
about it consistently,
wanted to make, I think, a point
of holding
a company accountable for
offshoring.
It's something that he said he
would do during
the campaign.
And I think that there was just
a convergence
of factors that made Carrier the
right case
in which to make some progress.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's been
reported today, though,
that the $6 million, $7 million
in tax incentives
that the state of Indiana is
offering Carrier
is something that was offered to
them before
and Carrier turned it down.
So what's different now?
SCOTT PAUL: Well, I think what's
different
now is that there was no one in
the state
of Indiana who was in a position
to offer
both carrots and sticks.
And whether it was directly or
indirectly,
certainly, the knowledge that
there are billions
of dollars in defense contracts,
that there
is the ongoing exposure that the
president
of the United States is going to
focus on
this company is not helpful and
probably causes
their executives and their board
to say, let's
see if we can work something out
here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Greg Ip, is there
any precedent
for this kind of move on the
part of a president
or president-elect?
GREG IP: You can sort of see
elements of it
in different walks of life.
Back in the '60s, for example,
just as inflation
was beginning to be a big
problem, Presidents
Kennedy and Johnson would often
publicly browbeat
companies for raising prices and
threatening
to move federal defense
purchases to different
countries.
And we see this in other
countries all the
time.
Brazil and France, to name two
examples, have
a long history in intervening in
business
decisions to protect local jobs.
What I don't think we see is
much evidence
that in the long run those types
of tactics
make much difference, when the
economics of
production are pushing in the
other direction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
that, Scott
Paul?
Is this something that could be
replicated
company by company by company in
this country?
SCOTT PAUL: Right.
Well, there's a company around
the corner
from Carrier, Rexnord, which
still plans to
offshore production to Mexico.
And so from a case management
perspective,
there were about 1,600 plant
closures or notices
over the last two years that are
related to
trade.
It's impossible to work through
that list.
But I will also say that I think
an intervention
like this sends shockwaves
through corporate
boardrooms.
When they're making sourcing
decisions, they're
considering the labor cost
factor that Greg
indicated.
They also consider some the
risks that would
result from exiting the United
States and
whether there could be other
consequences
for that as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And consequence,
excuse me,
is a term, Greg Ip, that the
president-elect
used today.
He said there will be
consequences when other
companies announce they are
leaving and moving
jobs out of this country.
What consequences could there
be?
GREG IP: Well, he hasn't been
specific, but
if you go back over some of the
campaign rhetoric,
well, obviously, there's the
bully pulpit,
just publicly shaming these
companies.
And that again is not new to
Trump.
If you remember, back in 2004,
John Kerry
was making noises about Benedict
Arnold CEOs
in a similar context.
So, that's got a long and
gloried tradition.
He can, for example, imply the
threat that
federal business will be
withheld from some
of these companies.
That's possibly dangerous
precedent.
You know what I mean?
When -- the Pentagon has very
specific guidelines,
for example, when it goes out
and does procurement.
You don't want them buying a jet
engine which
is actually inferior to another
jet engine
simply because that other
company outsourced
some jobs.
The final thing that Trump could
do is he
could impose tariffs on any
products that
are imported once they have been
outsourced
to another country.
It's not clear how they could do
it.
The legal authority is somewhat
murky.
But there's not much question
that he could
do it if he wanted to do it.
And that's why people do worry
that we end
up with a trade war as a result
of these tactics.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is that a concern
for the manufacturing
sector, Scott Paul?
SCOTT PAUL: Well, I think a
full-blown trade
war is unlikely.
There are a lot of safeguards in
place to
prevent it from escalating to
that point.
I think that there are a lot of
domestic businesses
that would argue we're in a
trade war with
China now.
We haven't pushed back all that
much.
And, again, the signal that this
sends to
corporate America and to our
trade partners
is that we're going to drive a
tougher bargain.
I don't know that we have always
done that.
And depending on how it's
managed, it could
yield some returns for American
businesses
and American workers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's what
I'm trying
to understand, Greg Ip.
On balance, is this move today
and maybe a
few other moves down the road
likely to alter
the health of the American
economy, the well-being
of American workers across the
board?
GREG IP: There's no question
that protectionist
or sort of moral suasion efforts
like this
can make a difference on a
case-by-case basis.
We have seen it in the past.
It will probably save a few
thousand, possibly
more, jobs this time.
But, as we were discussing
earlier, if the
economics are saying that this
is an expensive
place to produce stuff, it's
very hard to
see that turning that around.
That's why it would be more
useful to focus
on some of the other points that
I think Mr.
Trump was making today about
making this a
better place to manufacture.
And that's not really about like
threatening
or bribery, which is what
incentives really
are.
It's about lower tax rates, less
regulation
and better education.
There are 300,000 manufacturing
jobs that
are vacant right now because
employers are
having trouble finding the right
skilled workers.
Back when the Carrier
announcement was made
earlier this year, the union
representative
got a phone call from Boeing
saying, hey,
we need 60 skilled workers, are
your guys
available?
Unfortunately, very few of those
people had
the skills necessary that Boeing
was looking
for.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's
interesting.
So, Scott Paul, again, same
question.
On balance, is something like
this -- if Donald
Trump is talking about tax
reductions for
corporations, talking about
doing away with
a lot of regulations, is that
going to create
an environment where many
American companies
will decide not to send jobs
overseas?
SCOTT PAUL: Yes, I think Greg is
right that
the macro environment is going
to be critically
important here.
And it's a combination of the
corporate tax
code, the strength of the
dollar, which is
very important to our exporters,
the work
force, the investments that
we're making in
our infrastructure, because
labor, quite honestly,
is becoming a smaller component
in the cost
of manufacturing.
Energy, the materials make a big
difference.
And the other factor here is
that these countries
compete for business with us by
offering these
subsidies all the time.
If they see the United States is
in the game
of this, it could change the
equation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Scott Paul, Greg
Ip, we thank
you both.
GREG IP: Thank you.
SCOTT PAUL: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
six-week-long battle
for the ISIS-held city of Mosul
has become
an increasingly tough urban war
for the American-backed
Iraqi forces.
Up to a million civilians still
live in the
city.
The front lines are often too
dangerous for
international aid workers, but
two young American
volunteers are there saving
lives while risking
their own.
From Mosul, special
correspondent Jane Ferguson
and producer Matt McGarry filed
this report.
A warning: Viewers may find some
of the imagery
disturbing.
JANE FERGUSON: Crying in pain, a
tiny patient
is carried into this basic
treatment center
in Mosul.
His name is Karam.
And at just 5 years old, the
agony and fear
are too much.
"Hawa" (ph), says his father,
mortar.
His leg was shattered when it
was hit two
weeks ago.
It was operated on, and is now
infected.
His father tries to comfort him.
For parents, war brings a
terrible fear of
loss.
Two American medics are helping
Karam.
They have been at this post for
about a month,
treating civilians injured in
the fighting.
How many of your patients are
children?
PETE REED, Volunteer: Too many.
DEREK COLEMAN, Volunteer: At
least a quarter.
JANE FERGUSON: Injured by?
PETE REED: Everything.
DEREK COLEMAN: Car bombs,
mortars, snipers.
PETE REED: Shot.
JANE FERGUSON: Karam is lucky.
He managed to find treatment
from ISIS doctors.
It's crude, but at least he will
be able to
walk again.
He probably won't lose the leg.
Is this kind of injury common?
PETE REED: The injury, yes.
And actually making it to
surgery was less
common?
JANE FERGUSON: So, where would
have gone for
the surgery?
PETE REED: He went in Mosul.
There are still operating
hospitals there.
JANE FERGUSON: Inside ISIS
territory?
PETE REED: Yes.
JANE FERGUSON: These two
American volunteers,
both just 27 years old, are the
first and
only point of help civilians and
Iraqi army
soldiers get this close to the
front line
of fighting in Mosul.
Pete Reed is from Bordentown,
New Jersey.
After two tours in Afghanistan
as a Marine,
he came to Iraq to help.
Derek Coleman is from San Diego.
He was a machinist in a factory
with some
medical training before coming
here as a volunteer.
®MD-BO /DEREK COLEMAN: I don't
have any kids,
girlfriend, wife, nothing like
that.
So I wanted a little adventure,
and see ISIS
as an evil enemy, and saw good
people fighting
against it, and I thought I
could help somehow.
And medical work seems to be
much more important
than carrying a gun and shooting
at people.
JANE FERGUSON: Other charities
are miles back
from the front lines, wary of
putting their
staff in harm's way.
Because of ISIS suicide car
bombs, the civilians
of Mosul are banned from driving
cars.
Many of the injured wouldn't
survive if Pete
and Derek were not this close to
the fighting.
DEREK COLEMAN: The location is
everything
with what we are doing.
NGOs and other organizations
can't get anywhere
close to where we are.
So, what we are doing is, we are
stopping
bleeding that would kill someone
in five minutes.
We are stabilizing patients that
hopefully
survive the trip to the closest
hospital.
Even with us, the hospitals are
so far away
at this point, that we are
afraid of how many
patients we lose on the road.
JANE FERGUSON: But being this
close to the
front puts Derek and Pete at
risk.
They are always short on
supplies, so Pete
has gone out to search for any
other medical
stations to ask for more.
Derek just begins telling us
about missing
the holiday.
DEREK COLEMAN: Thanksgiving was
interesting,
because Thanksgiving was also
when I left
home last year.
So, I had a turkey sandwich
alone.
(GUNFIRE)
DEREK COLEMAN: That was a little
close.
JANE FERGUSON: Bullets start
flying, and we
have to run for cover.
This is normal, this kind of
gunfire going
overhead?
DEREK COLEMAN: Yes.
Yes, it's pretty normal.
Our proximity to the front line,
it's bound
to happen.
JANE FERGUSON: Derek calls to
warn Pete to
be careful.
The fighting has intensified
around us.
DEREK COLEMAN: Hey, buddy.
How are you doing?
We have had quite a few rounds
pass really
close to our CCP here, worse
that yesterday.
So I just wanted to give you
guys a warning
as you are pulling up and just
check in with
you.
JANE FERGUSON: In the meantime,
Derek prepares
for the next patients, which
will surely come.
The conditions here are harsh,
but they have
learned to manage.
DEREK COLEMAN: As you can see,
I'm kind of
bloodied here, and I don't
really have time
to always clean it all off.
So I just try to not look like a
I came out
of a butcher shop as best I can.
JANE FERGUSON: Pete arrives back
empty-handed,
his search for supplies
unsuccessful, just
as more patients are brought in.
The center is also the first
point of treatment
for many Iraqi soldiers, their
bodies brutalized
by the urban warfare that rages
just down
the road.
We are not allowed to film the
injured and
dying soldiers who arrived at
the center.
Iraqi special forces medics are
here too,
some trained by the two young
Americans.
They often treat civilians, many
transported
here by the army in
war-weathered Humvees.
Soon, one pulls up, and a child
wrapped in
a blanket is lifted from it.
A soldier races her into the
center.
Her aunt stays outside,
hysterical with fear
and grief.
MAN: Hold her (EXPLETIVE
DELETED) head, somebody.
JANE FERGUSON: The small girl
has been shot
in the head by an ISIS sniper.
Incredibly, she is still alive.
Pete and Derek fight hard to
save her life.
PETE REED: Tell her to stay
still, stay still.
JANE FERGUSON: They manage to
bandage her
head.
PETE REED: Plaster, plaster.
JANE FERGUSON: Despite brave
efforts, the
little girl died.
Do you think, given what you
have witnessed,
that ISIS are deliberating
targeting civilians?
PETE REED: Yes.
They are shooting people with
white flags.
They are shooting kids.
Last week, we had two kids in a
row who had
been shot in the neck or the
head by a Da'esh
sniper because they were fleeing
Mosul, not
accidental grazing fire or
anything like that,
proper sniper shots, head and
neck and face.
Yes, they're -- they're
purposely trying to
kill these people who are
running away.
JANE FERGUSON: Being in the
crossfire and
tending to death, his family are
worried about
him.
PETE REED: Yes, they worry a
lot, probably
for good reason.
Who wouldn't worry?
It's not like, I don't know, a
ski instructor
in Wyoming.
I'm on the front lines in the
battle for Mosul.
They are really, really
supportive.
They're just terrified of what
I'm doing.
JANE FERGUSON: Are you changed?
PETE REED: Am I changed?
Yes.
You can only see so many dead
kids a day so
many days in a row before you
are going to
be changed.
People see one dead kid or one
traumatic thing
happen, and it affects them for
the rest of
their life.
I have seen a couple hundred.
I'm doing OK.
JANE FERGUSON: Inside, spirits
are high, because
Karam, the first child we met,
is feeling
better.
A little tenderness and some
candy have helped.
He has been fortunate to cheat
death in this
violent place.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jane
Ferguson
in Mosul, Iraq.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
link between
distrust of government and
crumbling infrastructure;
and an author's take on changing
how society
thinks about marijuana.
But first: Today is World AIDS
Day.
While the death toll from AIDS
has dropped
dramatically, the virus still
claims over
a million people every year, and
nearly 40
million remain infected.
William Brangham has an update.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: With the
growing use of
medications to treat and prevent
the spread
of HIV, some say ending the AIDS
epidemic
is actually within reach.
But AIDS is still the number one
killer of
reproductive age women, and in
many places,
those lifesaving drugs are
barely available.
Scientists are also seeking a
vaccine.
A new trial is under way right
now in South
Africa.
But many remain skeptical.
I'm joined now by "Science"
magazine's Jon
Cohen, who's covered this
epidemic for nearly
30 years and was a collaborator
with us on
our recent series about HIV and
AIDS.
Jon Cohen, welcome back to the
"NewsHour."
Let's start off by talking about
this vaccine
trial in South Africa.
As you well know, you wrote the
book about
the hunt for an HIV vaccine.
What is happening in South
Africa right now?
Is this as promising as some
think it is?
JON COHEN, "Science": Well, the
AIDS vaccine
is the Holy Grail.
People can come in, get a few
shots, be protected
for life.
That's the dream.
In Thailand in 2009, it was
revealed that
a vaccine being studied there
protected people
with about a 31 percent
reduction in risk.
That's not very good.
That's extremely low, but it was
something.
It was the first glimmer of
hope.
The vaccine trial in South
Africa is building
off that Thai trial.
The results from the Thai trial
were extremely
controversial.
There are people who wonder why
that vaccine
strategy has moved forward in
South Africa,
and there are South Africans who
argue very
strongly that this is a great
hope for them,
and even if they get some
protection, in addition
to other protective measures, it
could make
a big difference.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: OK.
Now let's talk a little bit more
broadly
Where are the successes
currently in the fight
against HIV?
And where are those happening?
JON COHEN: Well, clearly,
preventing mother-to-child
transmission has been a huge
success all around
the world.
It's one of the easiest things
to do in terms
of prevention.
And some countries like South
Africa have
reduced it to below 2 percent of
pregnant
women who are infected passing
on the virus.
That's a great success.
Treatment now has scaled up from
basically
being zero in poor countries
around the world
in the year 2000 to 18.2 million
of the 36.7
million infected people.
Phenomenal success story.
People who are treated and stay
on treatment
fully suppress the virus and
they rarely transmit
to others.
So that is leading to hope that
epidemics
can stop petering out.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: What about the
remaining
challenges?
Obviously, there are still
troubling high
rates of HIV among particular
populations
around the world.
You and I saw that as we
traveled through
Africa and here in the U.S.
What are the other big
challenges facing AIDS?
JON COHEN: So, one big challenge
is that only
half the people who need
treatment are getting
treatment.
So, that's an enormous
challenge.
And the other one, as you
mentioned, is there
are a lot of young people who
are getting
infected.
I mean, 2.1 million people are
still getting
infected every year.
And that number isn't changing
very much.
So something needs to be done
particularly
to reach young women in much of
sub-Saharan
Africa, who are highly
vulnerable.
And it is really unclear in many
places, like
South Africa, why they're
becoming infected
at such extraordinarily high
rates.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: UNICEF
recently put out
a very stark warning, saying
that if prevention
efforts weren't ramped up, we
would see what
they argued was a real spike in
new incidences
amongst adolescents.
What can be done to do that?
Are you hopeful that we can
actually nip that
in the bud?
JON COHEN: It's one of the most
vexing problems.
I mean, there are a few
problems.
One is adolescents are
risk-takers.
Any of us who have adolescents
certainly know
that.
And they don't perceive
themselves as being
in harm's way, even when it's
clear that there
is a lot of HIV in their
community.
The other is, some adolescents
are infected
at birth, and they are only
learning about
their infection, as you and I
saw in Rwanda,
when they get to be teenagers
and get sick.
And then they have trouble
staying on medication
because there is a lot of
resentment about
the fact that they were infected
and nobody
told them the truth about, let's
say, how
their mother died.
So, both of those things
combined create a
really, really big problem.
And there's no easy solution.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Lastly, Jon,
what about
the issue of funding?
As we traveled across much of
South Africa,
we heard repeatedly that funding
is an issue.
What is the trend line looking
in that regard?
JON COHEN: The world is short
about $7 billion
a year, according to UNAIDS'
estimates.
And so the question is, where is
more money
going to come from?
Is it going to come donor
wealthy countries
or domestic sources?
Both are strapped.
There's hope that, with evidence
of things
working in countries like Malawi
and Zimbabwe
and Zambia, which today report
that they have
had phenomenal success keeping
people suppressed
and on treatment, that that will
lead funders
to think this investment is
worth it and let's
put some more into control this
thing once
and for all.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right.
"Science" magazine's Jon Cohen,
thank you
so much.
You can find additional
reporting on AIDS
from our series that aired last
summer.
That's on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now
infrastructure investment
may be moving back front and
center.
President-elect Trump plans to
push for it
through the private sector.
Democrats in Congress remain
interested in
greater public investment.
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman,
takes a trip on the rails to
look at how attitudes
have changed over time, part of
his weekly
series, Making Sense.
ANNOUNCER: Attention, please,
this is the
last call.
PAUL SOLMAN: Mid-morning at New
York's Penn
Station.
Throngs rush to the 10:00 a.m.
Acela to Washington,
D.C. Ridership is up and these
highish-speed
trains are at or near capacity
as business
travelers chug up and down the
Northeast Corridor.
WOMAN: Amtrak conductor 2153 to
the heading.
All stations are cleared.
PAUL SOLMAN: But they're
hurrying up in an
America of slowed-down
productivity, the amount
of output per hour of work
rising at just
1.3 percent a year since 2007,
compared to
more than double that rate from
1947 to 1973.
One cause, America's crumbling
infrastructure,
like our passenger rail system,
some of which
dates to the Civil War, causing
delays that
hamstring the economy.
Wick Moorman worked his way to
the top of
the Norfolk Southern Freight
Railroad, before
retiring last year, returning to
work recently,
at a dollar a year, to steer and
revive Amtrak.
Riding the Acela back to New
York, he insisted
it's not just our railroads that
need work.
WICK MOORMAN, CEO, Amtrak: When
you look at
the state of our highway system
today, which
we all get out and drive on
every day, in
terms of congestion, in terms of
the surface
conditions, in terms of the fact
that we're
seeing that more and more
bridges have to
be closed to rehabilitate, it
has to be an
economic drag, right?
Highway congestion alone costs
this country
an enormous amount of
productivity.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, why aren't we
investing in
infrastructure of the kind that
made America
great in the '40s, '50s, '60s,
government
investments that hiked our
economy to unheard-of
heights of productivity?
So asks Yale's Jacob Hacker.
His answer?
JACOB HACKER, Yale University:
We have forgotten
the incredibly important role
that government
plays in our prosperity.
PAUL SOLMAN: And thus the term
"American Amnesia,"
Hacker's new book, subtitled
"How the War
on Government Led Us to Forget
What Made America
Prosper," because, in the 19th
and 20th centuries,
prosper, we did.
JACOB HACKER: We went from being
from a relatively
poor, relatively undereducated
and relatively
unhealthy society to being the
richest, the
most well-educated and the
healthiest society
that the world had ever seen.
After World War II, we see the
blossoming
of this really active investing
state that's
investing on both non-defense
and defense
technology and really sowing the
seeds for
the productivity revolution that
occurs during
this period.
PAUL SOLMAN: Government outlays
of land for
railroads, say, subsidies for
airports and
waterways that helped make the
country one
market, speed goods and labor
from coast to
coast.
Think of Republican President
Eisenhower's
interstate highway system.
JACOB HACKER: The estimates are
that it accounted
for something like a third of
productivity
growth in the U.S. economy in
the late 1950s,
and around a quarter in the
1960s.
PAUL SOLMAN: And what's true of
hard infrastructure
is true of what were once
America's greatest
soft productivity advantages:
health and education.
JACOB HACKER: If you look at
older Americans
in the United States, they're
the most educated
older citizens in the world.
But if you look at younger
Americans, we have
fallen to the high teens in
terms of college
completion rates.
So, in a new economy that's
based much more
on knowledge and technology,
we're not investing
adequately or correctly to get
kids through
college the way other countries
are.
PAUL SOLMAN: In short, claims
Hacker, we forgot
what made us great, and instead
adopted a
profound skepticism about
government.
JACOB HACKER: As we have seen
government become
weaker and lobbyists more
powerful, Americans
have also become less trusting
of governments.
PAUL SOLMAN: And yet, these
days, government
investments may actually be the
most productive
ones available.
JACOB HACKER: If you look at how
our economy
has suffered over the last 15 or
20 years,
it's in significant part because
we haven't
done the investments in research
and development
and infrastructure and other
public goods
that are necessary for our
growth.
And, unfortunately, we're going
to be feeling
that overhang for a long time to
come, because
it's the investments we made in
the 1950s
and '60s and '70s that result in
some of the
greatest technological
breakthroughs that
we enjoy today.
PAUL SOLMAN: Such as?
JACOB HACKER: The iPhone.
We have an iPhone here?
PAUL SOLMAN: I have got one.
JACOB HACKER: Every major
component of your
iPhone is as a result of public
investment
and development.
GPS, the memory processors,
touch-screen technology,
originated in public research
projects.
PAUL SOLMAN: As we neared New
York, the lack
of investment in passenger rail
was hard to
miss.
The Acela decelerated, cars on
I-95 whizzing
past us.
That prompted a question to
Amtrak's CEO:
Why had we slowed to a crawl?
WICK MOORMAN: Because there's a
New Jersey
transit train going into Penn
Station ahead
of us, and we have exactly two
tracks under
that river.
and we get this kind of
congestion all the
time.
PAUL SOLMAN: Moreover, those
rail tunnels,
now more than a century old,
were flooded
by Hurricane Sandy four years
ago.
WICK MOORMAN: And I think that
the day is
coming when this nation is just
going to be
forced to invest, if we want to,
you know,
maintain our place in the world.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
President-Elect: We are
going to fix our inner cities
and rebuild
our highways, bridges, tunnels,
airports,
schools, hospitals.
We're going to rebuild our
infrastructure,
which will become, by the way,
second to none.
PAUL SOLMAN: On election night,
president-elect
Donald Trump touted his plan for
rebuilding
America, $137 billion in federal
tax credits
to private investors who would
then be incentivized
to finance toll roads, toll
bridges or other
projects that generate their own
revenue,
unleashing a hoped-for trillion
dollars of
infrastructure investment over
10 years.
And, if it works, says Jacob
Hacker, a Democrat:
JACOB HACKER: He's the
Nixon-goes-to-China
of infrastructure spending.
But I also think he has a very
good chance
of putting through massive tax
cuts.
They're going to take away a lot
of the public
funds that we need to do that
kind of infrastructure
investment.
PAUL SOLMAN: Furthermore, some
private infrastructure
investments, like toll roads,
have failed
in recent years.
As for private investment in
Amtrak?
Well, says its new CEO:
WICK MOORMAN: I'm skeptical.
Where -- how do you -- you fund
private investment,
as you know, in the highways by
things like
tolls.
PAUL SOLMAN: Right.
WICK MOORMAN: Right?
Well, that's harder out here.
PAUL SOLMAN: Not going to have a
toll at Wilmington.
WICK MOORMAN: No.
I mean, every time the train
goes through
with an E-ZPass, and you kind of
click off
another one?
It's just -- it's harder for me
to see right
now.
PAUL SOLMAN: And you're a guy
who went to
Harvard Business School.
You're not talking as some kind
of left-wing
Democrat who's always for more
and more spending,
more and more taxes.
WICK MOORMAN: No, no, no.
I'm just a person who looks at
the country
and what needs to be done and
says, this is
what we do in the business
world.
We fix this.
Why can't you fix it?
PAUL SOLMAN: Good question, to
which we will
all be waiting for the answer.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
economics
correspondent Paul Solman,
reporting aboard
Amtrak 2168.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The United States
and Iran
have been at odds for 37 years,
a standoff
that continues even as President
Obama signed
on to a deal this past summer
that sharply
limits Iran's nuclear
development.
Just today, as we reported, the
U.S. Senate
voted to extend sanctions
against Tehran.
Margaret Warner recently sat
down with Wall
Street Journal reporter Jay
Solomon to discuss
his book, "The Iran Wars: Spy
Games, Bank
Battles, and the Secret Deals
That Reshaped
the Middle East."
It's the latest addition to the
"NewsHour"
Bookshelf.
MARGARET WARNER: Jay Solomon,
welcome.
JAY SOLOMON, Author, "The Iran
Wars: Spy Games,
Bank Battles, and the Secret
Deals That Reshaped
the Middle East": Great to be
here.
MARGARET WARNER: What struck me
about this
book was your portrayal of
President Obama
as obsessed with Iran and with
getting a nuclear
deal really from the beginning.
Where did that come from?
JAY SOLOMON: So, I really think,
when he came
in, he saw the need to stop,
kind of defuse
the Iran weapons program, and
the need to
kind of avert another U.S. war
as converging.
We didn't know at the time that
he was sending
secret letters to the supreme
leader...
MARGARET WARNER: Yes.
JAY SOLOMON: ... that he was
really kind of
setting up a diplomatic track
and was just
hoping the Iranians would bite.
So, it really was a campaign
issue that became
a driving vision for him in his
first year.
MARGARET WARNER: So, President
Obama got his
nuclear deal, but he did pay a
really big
diplomatic price, didn't he, on
many fronts.
JAY SOLOMON: When I was doing
the research,
it really did kind of dominate
so many different
factions of his policy.
The negotiations with the
Iranians started
in secret, which -- basically
behind the backs
of the Israelis and Arabs, which
really has
continued to this day to serve
as a big source
of tension with the Obama
administration.
Of course, they say there was no
connection
whatsoever between our Syria
policy and the
decision not to use airstrikes
and our Iran
policy.
But we have seen kind of since
2013, when
Obama backed away from
airstrikes, almost
kind of the U.S. moving
increasingly towards
a policy that's in alignment in
some ways
with both the Russians and
Iranians.
And President Obama has sent
messages to the
supreme leader in letters and
through the
Pentagon that, basically, we're
not targeting
Assad.
MARGARET WARNER: In fact,
Iranian officials
had let the White House know
that that could
completely screw up the talks.
JAY SOLOMON: Yes, the diplomats
who were involved
were saying, even if we wanted
to keep this
diplomatic track open, if you
start bombing
the Assad regime, which really
provides Iran
strategic depth in the Middle
East and its
closest Arab ally, it will be
difficult for
us to continue.
MARGARET WARNER: Now, we have
this latest
controversy with what has turned
out to be
$1.7 billion that the U.S. in
cash has paid
to Iran in the last few months.
It's about a completely separate
negotiation
at The Hague, but is it or is it
not connected
to this nuclear deal?
JAY SOLOMON: Well, I think it
all did kind
of converge.
On January 16, the agreement was
basically
implemented.
And the next day, we had a
prisoner swap and
the payment of this money.
So I do think it was tied to the
nuclear negotiations
in this way.
But I think you have seen a real
cycle of
the Obama administration trying
to put kind
of past conflicts behind that
were brewing
with the Iranians.
But it's also raised a lot of
questions, because,
if you give that much money in
cash to the
Iranian government, there is a
real fear this
money went to the elite military
unit the
Revolutionary Guard.
It's very hard for them to move
money around
the Middle East to fund
Hezbollah and Lebanon,
the Assad regime.
If you give them that much cash,
you can move
that cash to these types of
regimes.
And I think that's part of the
reason why
this cash payment has become so
controversial
and is a political now.
MARGARET WARNER: And, of course,
it can't
be traced.
You spent a lot of time talking
to not only
American officials, but Iranian
officials,
and getting to know them well.
After these two years, do you
think that any
sort of trust developed in these
negotiations
that will survive it?
JAY SOLOMON: I do think it's
significant that
there was so much engagement
between John
Kerry and the Iranian foreign
minister, Javad
Zarif.
I think the problem is, Iran is
really in
many ways a dual system.
The U.S. was talking with very
Western-oriented,
English-speaking diplomats in
the Foreign
Ministry, but we know that the
policies are
really driven by the supreme
leader and the
Revolutionary Guards.
And there is still very much no
contact whatsoever
between the U.S. side and the
kind of hard-line
camp that really runs the
country.
So, history will show whether
there was a
narrowing.
But I think the kind of rhetoric
coming out
of the supreme leader has not
softened whatsoever.
And that raises questions
whether this is
kind of another transactional
part or it really
does lead to some approach
normal -- at rapprochement
on some level.
MARGARET WARNER: So, future
presidents will
have to deal with it, no doubt.
Jay Solomon, author of "The Iran
Wars: Spy
Games, Bank Battles, and the
Secret Deals
That Reshaped the Middle East,"
thank you.
JAY SOLOMON: Thank you so much.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We will be
back in a moment
with one author's perspective on
the evolving
culture of marijuana.
But, first, take a moment to
hear from your
local PBS station.
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps keep programs like ours on
the air.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to another in
our Brief
But Spectacular series.
This past election, multiple
states legalized
the use of marijuana for
recreation or medicinal
purposes.
Tonight, author Joe Dolce
provides some historical
context on the substance.
JOE DOLCE, Author, "Brave New
Weed: Adventures
Into the Uncharted World of
Cannabis": When
JOE DOLCE, Author, "Brave New
Weed: Adventures
Into the Uncharted World of
Cannabis": When
my mother was upset that I was
writing a book
on weed, I pulled this out,
which is an unguent
my mother was upset that I was
writing a book
on weed, I pulled this out,
which is an unguent
made of cannabis.
And I said, "Mom, do you have
any pain?"
She said, "Yes, my legs are
hurting me."
And I rubbed some on her.
And in three minutes, her pain
was gone.
That was a pretty easy way of
changing her
mind.
I know why weed gets such a bad
rap: because
the U.S. government, in addition
to many other
governments, has been
disseminating a lot
of negative information about it
for -- since
1937, really, so over 70 years.
Even the name marijuana was an
attempt by
the U.S. government to sort of
racially stigmatize
a plant that had here to before
known as cannabis.
What happened was, there were a
lot of Mexican
workers flooding over the
border.
And a very clever bureaucrat
named Harry Anslinger
figured out that he could
demonize those workers,
at the same time demonize this
weed.
So, what he did is, he actually
changed the
name from cannabis, which was in
medicine
chests, to marijuana, which
became known as
loco weed.
They demonized it.
He passed legislation.
He kept his job going, because
he ran the
Federal Bureau of Narcotics, so
he had something
to do.
And he arrested people like
Anita O'Day and
Gene Krupa.
He arrested musicians for
smoking it.
The war on drugs in America
started when Richard
Nixon had the very clever idea
of associating
the hippies and disorder with
marijuana.
When Ronald Reagan came into
office in the
'80s, he turned that war
nuclear.
He was spraying fields with
paraquat.
He was raiding people.
He was arresting people.
We had minimum drug sentencing
laws.
I think we're at a tipping point
right now
at the legalization of cannabis.
Labeling is going to
change the world of weed.
In the same way you know that a
shot of spirits
equals a six-ounce glass of wine
equals a
12-ounce bottle of beer, you're
going to be
able to dose.
You're going to be able to
understand the
standards that we intuitively
understand about
alcohol.
As a matter of fact, in
California, where
there's been a medical program
for 20 years,
a recent study showed that
parents are more
happy for their children to use
weed than
to begin drinking.
That's an interesting societal
change.
And I think it's going to have a
big effect
going forward.
My name is Joe Dolce, and this
is my Brief
But Spectacular take on weed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can find
additional
Brief But Spectacular episodes
on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
Also online, we look at two
potential medical
uses for other recreational
drugs.
A synthesized version of the
substance naturally
found in hallucinogenic
mushrooms shows promise
in treating anxiety and
depression in cancer
patients.
Meanwhile, the FDA approved
further research
into ecstasy as a treatment for
post-traumatic
stress disorder.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tonight on
"Charlie Rose":
She has been called the Joni
Mitchell of her
generation, singer/songwriter
Regina Spektor.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Friday, one week after
Castro's death,
our correspondent on the ground
reports on
Cuba after Fidel.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening with Mark Shields and
David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.